A Kamalahassan movie titled “Apoorva Sakotharargal”…
In that, Kamal will come up with a contraption
to perform an assassination.
This Honda ad is quite similar too.
Composed of spare parts from a Honda car,
this video shows a little spare part touching
another, triggering an action, setting something
in motion, and so on.
You must have seen many videos like this one,
on the Internet.
Can you connect this advertisement to a cartoonist
who was born nearly 150 years ago…?
What links them both?
Shall we see?
Namaste!
Four Hundred and Thirteen.
It is all about dots!
This is the cartoonist I was referring to.
Rube Goldberg is his name.
And, they say, there have been many people
whose names have entered the dictionary, but,
first name, last name, together, he is probably
the only guy to have entered the dictionary.
A Rube Goldberg contraption, or a Rube Goldberg
machine, is a setup that is very very very
elaborate, almost as elaborate as somebody
touching their nose with their arm snaking
around the back, doesn’t achieve much, in
fact, it is silly and ridiculous.
Always has a much straightforward, easy, simple
alternative that could have done the job.
But, there is a lot of creative genius involved.
For example, let us look at just one of the
many many cartoon-like graphics that he has
drawn and given schematics for.
The Simple Mosquito Exterminator is the name
of the invention.
The mosquito enters window and walks along
board, which is strewn with small chunks of
rare steak — after munching steak as he
walks, he is overcome by fumes coming from
sponge which is soaked in chloroform, and
falls on platform.
When he regains consciousness, he looks through
telescope and spies reflection of bald head
in mirror.
He mistakes this for the real thing, jumps
off spring-board and dashes his brains out
against the mirror, falling lifeless in to
can.
Silly?
Funny??
Creative!
The Rube Goldberg machine, or the Rube Goldberg
version of something, they call it.
Creatively coming up with different moving
parts, each connected to the other.
On BBC, there used to be a TV program called
Connections.
A science-based TV program.
There weren’t many, but this one, it was
called Connections, it ran for three seasons.
It even came out in book form.
The same scientist who played host, was the
author.
James Burke was his name.
In that creative, science-based television
series by James Burke, the standout feature
was how he stressed on the concept that “Science
did not have a roadmap.
It did not have a plan.
We have got this invented.
Next, we have to discover that.
And then, we will be able to reach that destination.”
etc.
No!
Science just kept collecting one after the
other, and then, a structure started to emerge.
Only after turning the corner off a narrow
street, one gets to view the wide highway
that opens up to the left!
He takes the example of how the nuclear bomb
actually came about.
He starts with gold.
People used to cheat by mixing other metals
with gold.
And along the way, there was one invention.
A touchstone.
This touchstone was able to prove whether
it was pure gold or not.
And, when this happened, people switched from
bartering to currency.
And, because of the arrival of this currency,
Alexander became a very famous king, he was
able to occupy a lot of territory, and he
brought knowledge from all around the world,
and there was a library, created in Alexandria.
The library of Alexandria.
It became the collection-point for a LOT of
information.
From the far corners of the world.
One of the pieces of information?
Star maps.
How to navigate by looking at and tracking
the stars up there in the sky.
Information about that.
And, because that information proved accurate
and useful, Man was able to venture out into
the Seas.
Places He hadn’t been to, before.
And, only when He started doing that, he was
suddenly shocked to realise, that this compass
wasn’t pointing towards the North Star,
but was instead reacting to the magnetic field
of this thing called Earth itself!
And, he started experimenting!
And, from that experimentation, came Electricity.
This led to much research about atmospheric
electricity.
Can we bring those two things together, was
the question.
The Wilson Cloud Chamber was the answer.
To talk about the atmospheric effects of electricity.
An indirect discovery there was the boundless
energy hidden inside the atom.
If we were to aim a fast proton on to the
nucleus of another atom, we would see the
release of that energy!
Gold replaced the barter system, one connected
with the other, and finally we have the nuclear
bomb.
If we look back, we can see all the dots connecting.
But, we can’t start with the goal, an end
goal.
That would be severely limiting.
It would be too blinding, says James Burke.
Connecting the dots.
We have all watched The Big Bang Theory, haven’t
we?
The television series.
My favourite character in it?
Sheldon of course!
It could be this young man.
Or, it could be this tiny tot too.
But, one thing that stands out when we think
of them, is their intellect.
The precocious kid, or the genius-level college
researcher.
We always look up to this guy.
Socially, probably, he is not very well-adjusted,
but, wow, every time, he would be the smart
resolver!
For Sheldon, in the Big Bang Series, they
would dedicate a small video series inside,
do you remember?
It wasn’t about Explaining Physics or Understanding
Chemistry.
It was about having Fun with Flags.
So many countries.
So many flags.
This man has a nearly photographic, eidetic
memory, and he would talk about each country
and its flag.
Why do you think they picked something to
do with memory, and a childhood obsession,
when talking about probably the smartest man
in television?
Is there a connection hidden there?
We know this person.
Viswanathan Anand.
A book about him, by him.
Called Mind Master.
He talks about something pretty confessional.
You may lower your opinion about me if I tell
this to you frankly, he starts.
He talks about how he forgets their wedding
anniversary, and his wife mocks him for his
so-called photographic memory.
Aruna is her name.
And, for this scolding he receives from her,
he shares a research that collected data about
the so-called photographic memory of chess
players at various levels.
From a beginner, an intermediate player, a
Master, and a Grandmaster.
They tested how good the memory of these players
were.
The way they tested it?
They gave a lot of chess positions.
They were tested on how well those positions
were remembered and recollected a while later.
Were they able to recall those positions blindfolded?
And propose a best next move?
Clearly, the Grandmaster was able to recall
and reproduce, but the beginner was clueless.
He couldn’t do well.
You know what they did next with the same
groups of people?
They randomised the chess positions.
These positions simply won’t happen in the
natural flow of the game of chess.
Giving them such random positions, the researchers
tested their memory power once again.
The Grandmaster and the Intermediate player
and the Beginner?
They all performed equally BADLY.
What is Anand trying to say here?!
That this Memory prowess of chess champions
is actually a myth.
We don’t really remember every piece in
every position.
We get an overall sense of groups, of valid
next positions, … That’s what the Mind
Master, the Chess Genius, says.
I am able to memorise and remember meaningful
positions, but I am clueless when it comes
to complicated positions that don’t really
occur in reality.
We have encountered Metcalfe’s Law.
If a node exists in a network, the number
of different combinations that can result
from it is directly dependent on how many
other nodes there are.
In a crowd of entities, as the number of entities
grow, the number of interactions among them
grows exponentially.
If there are three nodes, only three connections
are possible.
But, if there are five, it is ten.
If seven, twenty-one.
And, among just nine entities, we see a full
thirty-six connections being revealed.
Isn’t it readily apparent from this?
If you have one little entity of knowledge
in your mind, you have one idea.
But, if you have three entities, you have
three ideas, and if you have more entities,
the number of interconnecting ideas, (for,
it is in interconnections that ideas are actually
born!), for that number to go up, you need
to have more entities in the first place.
Do you see that from Metcalfe’s Law?
His name is David Perell.
He has written a lot about a concept called
The Personal Monopoly.
To stand out in the world, to stand out on
the Internet, to be an exclusive personal
brand, his advice is that you have to go deeper
and deeper and narrower and narrower, you
will have to keep overlapping and looking
at that overlap zone, until you are the World’s
Expert in what YOU do.
And, David Perell says, a life of creativity
is all about collecting the dots, yes…
You need to first be divergent, voraciously
pick and collect from everywhere.
After that, you will have to spend time connecting
the dots.
And, only after that, you emerge with YOU
as your personal brand.
He calls it the DICE framework.
You DIverge and Collect; and then, having
collected, you Converge by connecting them
up; and finally, having created your personal
identity, you branch out and Emerge!
And, those dots?
What are they really?
It may be information.
It may be contacts.
People you know!
It may be exposure to environments!
(I have been in a corporate environment.
I have been in the Arctic cold.
I have attended a Western music event.
All of these are experiences from unique environments).
It could be new ways of thinking.
How would my project plan change if I had
an infinite budget?
How would we paint this if I were allowed
only blue and shades of blue as my constraint?
If the weapon I had in my hand were only a
hammer, how will we open this box?
It could be new ways of thinking.
It could be new points of view.
If a mosquito or a fly perceived the world,
with a million little eyes, how would the
world look?
If Cyclops, with the famous third-eye, how
would he observe the world, how would he thread
a needle…?
Points of view.
So, each of those dots need not be bits of
information alone.
It could be all of what I said just now.
He calls it the DICE framework.
Diverge (collect, collect, collect), then
Converge (by connecting), and then, Emerge!
I want to extend this a bit.
Instead of DICE, I want to call it DICES.
Add a little thing at the end.
I hope he wouldn’t mind.
That S is for Sharing.
You have collected.
You have connected.
You also have to Share with the others.
Not as a benevolent, altruistic, friend of
the world.
For personal gain, for selfish benefit, you
can benefit simply by Sharing.
Want to know why?
There is an App like this.
It is called Shadowmatic.
Available both on Android and iPhone.
And, let me play a sample video for you.
It is about a wall.
Two/three pieces hanging in air, casting a
shadow.
Seems to make no sense, when you look at these.
But, when you look across to the wall, something
is taking shape!
Those dots that you collected from one point
of view, that you connected from one personal
point of view, will be influenced and biased
by your own mindset.
But, when you share and give away those dots,
somebody else, obviously from some other viewpoint
will look at it, and what wasn’t apparent
to you, the seahorse, they may be able to
recognise it right away.
And they, in turn, will give it away back
to you.
And, that’s when two plus two becomes, not
four, not five, but probably twenty-two.
DICES.
Diverge.
Collect.
Converge.
Connect.
Emerge.
Share.
My closing thought for today is a little deeper
dig into the greatest minds that we have seen
in recent times.
Steve Jobs.
We all remember this quote of his, from the
Stanford Commencement Address.
Creativity is about connecting the dots, you
can only connect the dots backwards.
But…, an autobiography titled “I, Steve”.
In that, he talks again about these dots.
And, what did he say there?
He says, “Creativity is about having enough
dots to connect!”
Some people, simply because of the minimal
experiences and exposures they have had, become
a one-track mind.
They can have only limited thoughts.
But, when you collect seemingly unconnected
experiences, they get to a better position,
and they are able to see patterns where others
only see dots.
We will meet again.
Thank you!